---
title: "The first completely decentralized packet network"
---

Ouroboros is a __peer-to-peer transport network__ built on a new
__recursive network paradigm__ built according to a __UNIX design
philosphy__. The aim is to provide a __secure__ and __private__
networking experience and __simplify writing distributed software__
and networking libraries. It provides a __very simple API__, enabling
__unicast__ and __multicast__ services.

Ouroboros can be __overlayed over UDP and Ethernet__. IP applications
can be tunneled over Ouroboros. Ouroboros provides its own name
resolution, reliability mechanisms, routing algorithms, and congestion
control.

Ouroboros was originally started at [imec](www.imec-int.com) under its
Future Internet research, and is [free
software](https://www.fsf.org/about/what-is-free-software). It is
written in C for and its application library provides a simple,
unified API for synchronous and asynchronous Inter-Process
Communication (IPC) and networking.

The best places to start exploring Ouroboros is this introduction
presented at [FOSDEM
2018](https://www.fosdem.org/2018/schedule/event/ipc/), and the [PhD
dissertation](https://biblio.ugent.be/publication/8615152) of Sander
Vrijders, especially chapters 5-6.

This new website is currently under construction and undergoing
frequent updates. The documentation is still sparse, please don't
hesitate to [contact us](/contribute) with any questions you might
have.
